README.md, before:

# Bank Teller 

Ruby bank teller program developed to practise doing a tech test. Developed during week 9 of Makers Academy which focuses on code quality.

## Client requirements

* Able to interact with code via a REPL
* Deposits, withdrawals
* Account statement (date, amount, balance) printing
* Data can be kept in memory

### Acceptance criteria

* **Given** a client makes a deposit of 1000 on 10-01-2023
* **And** a deposit of 2000 on 13-01-2023
* **And** a withdrawal of 500 on 14-01-2023
* **When** she prints her bank statement
* **Then** she would see

```
date || credit || debit || balance
14/01/2023 || || 500.00 || 2500.00
13/01/2023 || 2000.00 || || 3000.00
10/01/2023 || 1000.00 || || 1000.00

```

## Test coverage

Generated with `simple-cov`:

![](assets/2022-05-23-code-coverage.png)

## Solution design approach

### 1. User stories

First I unpack the requirements into user stories: 

```
As a customer
so that I can keep my money safe
I want to deposit money into my account

As a customer
So that I can spend my money
I want to withdraw money from my account

As a customer
So that I can check my balance
I want to print an account statement with my balance on it

As a customer
So that I can keep track of my transactions
I want my account statement to include all transactions with their dates
```

### 2. Domain model

Secondly, I use domain modelling to diagram an object-oriented design to deliver the features set out in the user stories. I use Excalidraw as it is uncomplicated with unnecessary features, and creates nice-looking diagrams quickly.

![](assets/bank-teller-v1.excalidraw.png)

Principles I aim to follow for the design are:
- Keep it super simple (KISS): Avoid unnecessary complexity
- You Ain't Gonna Need It (YAGNI): Do the simplest thing that could possibly work and avoid adding functionality until deemed necessary
- Principle of least astonishment (POLA): A component of a system should behave in a way that most users will expect it to behave.

### 3. Update the domain model

Once I have implemented the `Account` class with `@balance` variable and `#deposit` and `#withdraw` methods, I realise that to store transaction date information I will need to expand my demain beyond my initial design to include a `@transactions` variable - an array that will receive transactions as hashes . Here is my updated design:

![](assets/bank-teller-v2.excalidraw.png)

### 4. Refactor extracting Transaction and Statement classes

At this point my production code passes the acceptance criteria. I refactor according to the updated design below to ensure single responsibility principle so that:
- Each object does one thing and one thing well

![](assets/bank-teller-v3.excalidraw.png)

## Code structure

The program is fronted by the `Account` class. The responsibility of this class is to **track balance and handle deposit and withdrawals**. It also holds a statement and provides an option to print the statement, though the engineering of this functionality resides with the statement class.

The `Account` class injects an instance of the `Statement` class on initiation, as well as the `Transaction` class.

The responsibility of the `Transaction` class is to **record transactions** by date, amoubt, type of transaction (credit or debit) and the balance on the account after the transaction.

The responsibility of the `Statement` class is to **store transactions and display them in an appropriate format**.

### Dependencies

For testing:
* `rspec`
* `simplecov` and `simplecov-console`

For development and testing:
* `rubocop`, `1.20`, using [Makers Academy Scaffolint linter file](https://github.com/makersacademy/scaffolint)

## Usage

### Getting started (installing the code)

Clone the repo locally: `git clone https://github.com/almorcrette/bank-teller`

Install dependencies: `bundle`

### Usage (executing the program)

Use irb as follows:
- Start up irb and load the necessary file: `irb -r './lib/account.rb'`
- Create an account to use: `acc = Account.new`

Message the user can use to interact with the account:
- `acc.deposit(amount)` to deposit an amount. e.g. `acc.deposit(100)`
- `acc.withdraw(amount)` to withdraw an amount. e.g. `acc.withdraw(50)`
- `acc.print_statement` to print statement of transactions.

### Running tests

`rspec`

## Potential future extensions
- Program allows an account to become overdrawn (amounts withdrawn exceed amounts deposited). I featur could be to restrict withdrawals to prevent this. It's not in the client requirements for this feature to be delivered, but this may be a future development that the client want.
- Account does not accrue interest on deposits. This could be another feature to be delivered
- An improved user interface could be developed, e.g. command line or GUI.

Commit message:

docs: Update README with changes based on coach feedback

README.md, after:

# Bank Teller 

Ruby bank teller program developed to practise doing a tech test. Developed during week 9 of Makers Academy which focuses on code quality.

## Client requirements

* Able to interact with code via a REPL
* Deposits, withdrawals
* Account statement (date, amount, balance) printing
* Data can be kept in memory

### Acceptance criteria

* **Given** a client makes a deposit of 1000 on 10-01-2023
* **And** a deposit of 2000 on 13-01-2023
* **And** a withdrawal of 500 on 14-01-2023
* **When** she prints her bank statement
* **Then** she would see

```
date || credit || debit || balance
14/01/2023 || || 500.00 || 2500.00
13/01/2023 || 2000.00 || || 3000.00
10/01/2023 || 1000.00 || || 1000.00

```

## Test coverage

Generated with `simple-cov`:

![](assets/2022-05-23-code-coverage.png)

## Solution design approach

### 1. User stories

First I unpack the requirements into user stories: 

```
As a customer
so that I can keep my money safe
I want to deposit money into my account

As a customer
So that I can spend my money
I want to withdraw money from my account

As a customer
So that I can check my balance
I want to print an account statement with my balance on it

As a customer
So that I can keep track of my transactions
I want my account statement to include all transactions with their dates
```

### 2. Domain model

Secondly, I use domain modelling to diagram an object-oriented design to deliver the features set out in the user stories. I use Excalidraw as it is uncomplicated with unnecessary features, and creates nice-looking diagrams quickly.

![](assets/bank-teller-v1.excalidraw.png)

Principles I aim to follow for the design are:
- Keep it super simple (KISS): Avoid unnecessary complexity
- You Ain't Gonna Need It (YAGNI): Do the simplest thing that could possibly work and avoid adding functionality until deemed necessary
- Principle of least astonishment (POLA): A component of a system should behave in a way that most users will expect it to behave.

### 3. Update the domain model

Once I have implemented the `Account` class with `@balance` variable and `#deposit` and `#withdraw` methods, I realise that to store transaction date information I will need to expand my demain beyond my initial design to include a `@transactions` variable - an array that will receive transactions as hashes . Here is my updated design:

![](assets/bank-teller-v2.excalidraw.png)

### 4. Refactor extracting Transaction and Statement classes

At this point my production code passes the acceptance criteria. I refactor according to the updated design below to ensure single responsibility principle so that:
- Each object does one thing and one thing well

![](assets/bank-teller-v3.excalidraw.png)

### 5. Further improvements

It's at this point that I submit to Makers coach fore feedback. [Checkout my commit at this stage here](https://github.com/almorcrette/bank-teller/commit/026404ad5b350949d94336906605bb76025095de).

Following feedback, I make the following additional changes to improve the quality of my code further:
- Adjust print statement format so that blank spaces have only one space between the `|`| characters;
- Remove state tests in for `Account` class, and strengthen by behaviour tests to ensure full behaviour coverage
- Tests dates using mocks in both the `Statement` tests and `Transaction` tests.
- Test drive error raises in `Transaction#parse_transaction` method to prevent invalid type or amount

### 6. Alternative object oriented design

I am also told by the coach that he disagrees with that I have given my `Statement` class responsibility for storing transactions.

I therefore also restructure the classes so that the account carries this responsibility.

This alternative design can be found [on this branch](https://github.com/almorcrette/bank-teller/tree/extracting-transaction-statement-classes)

## Code structure

The program is fronted by the `Account` class. The responsibility of this class is to **track balance and handle deposit and withdrawals**. It also holds a statement and provides an option to print the statement, though the engineering of this functionality resides with the statement class.

The `Account` class injects an instance of the `Statement` class on initiation, as well as the `Transaction` class.

The responsibility of the `Transaction` class is to **record transactions** by date, amoubt, type of transaction (credit or debit) and the balance on the account after the transaction.

The responsibility of the `Statement` class is to **store transactions and display them in an appropriate format**.

### Dependencies

For testing:
* `rspec`
* `simplecov` and `simplecov-console`

For development and testing:
* `rubocop`, `1.20`, using [Makers Academy Scaffolint linter file](https://github.com/makersacademy/scaffolint)

## Usage

### Getting started (installing the code)

Clone the repo locally: `git clone https://github.com/almorcrette/bank-teller`

Install dependencies: `bundle`

### Usage (executing the program)

Use irb as follows:
- Start up irb and load the necessary file: `irb -r './lib/account.rb'`
- Create an account to use: `acc = Account.new`

Message the user can use to interact with the account:
- `acc.deposit(amount)` to deposit an amount. e.g. `acc.deposit(100)`
- `acc.withdraw(amount)` to withdraw an amount. e.g. `acc.withdraw(50)`
- `acc.print_statement` to print statement of transactions.

### Running tests

`rspec`

## Potential future extensions
- Program allows an account to become overdrawn (amounts withdrawn exceed amounts deposited). I featur could be to restrict withdrawals to prevent this. It's not in the client requirements for this feature to be delivered, but this may be a future development that the client want.
- Account does not accrue interest on deposits. This could be another feature to be delivered
- An improved user interface could be developed, e.g. command line or GUI.
